In the previous video I mentioned that the C++ compiler must know all about a function before it allows
that function to be called.
I didn't say why though.
The reason for this is that the compiler can't check to see if the number of parameters passed in and
their types are correct when the function is called unless it knows about the function being called
before it's called.
There are two ways we can make this happen.
The first way is to make sure we define all functions before they're used.
This is OK for many small programs but it quickly becomes very difficult to do.
And in the case of two functions that call one another it's impossible.
So rather than have to worry about the order in which we define functions C++ allows us to create function
prototypes function prototypes tell the compiler All it needs to know about a function so they can be
sure that the function is being called correctly function prototypes are also called forward declarations.
Since you're basically telling the compiler Hey compiler This is what this function is going to look
like.
Make sure I use it that way.
In smaller programs all the function prototypes are generally placed near the top of a program usually
after the pound includes as programs get larger.
We split our programs up into multiple files so we include H or header files and we include function
prototypes in these files.
We'll see that a little bit later in the course.
Let's see what these function prototypes look like.
Here I've defined a function called function name at the bottom of the slide the function prototype
for this function is the first line of code you see.
Notice it looks very much like the function header.
That's the part of the function definition.
Right before the body of the function with a function prototype the compiler doesn't need to know what
the implementation of the function is only its header information.
So in this case it knows that you later define a function named function name that expects no parameters
and returns an integer.
If you use a function named function name it will enforce those conditions.
If you try to use it in any other way say by calling it with an integer in the parameter list then you
get a compiler error.
Pretty easy right.
You can have as many prototypes as you need one per function and it doesn't matter what order you declare
them in.
Let's take a look at another one.
In this case we have the same function named function name.
But this time it expects exactly one parameter.
So we provide a function prototype to the compiler that has an INT in the parameter list.
Note that we can supply the name of the parameter if we wish but it is used by the compiler.
The compiler doesn't care about the name only the type.
So either of these function prototypes can be used.
Best practice is to provide the parameter names for documentation purposes.
Let's see another example in this example we have a function that returns nothing when call.
So the function prototype must include the void keyword prior to the function name.
Just like the function definition does.
In this case the function expects two parameters an integer and a standard string.
So either one of these function prototypes in the slide is valid in one case we provide the parameter
types and names and the other only the parameter types.
The function prototype for the say hello function we saw in the previous video would look like this.
Void say hello and then the empty parameter list.
Notice the semi-colon at the end.
It's very important.
We're not specifying a body only the prototype.
If we try to call this function in any other manner we'll get a compiler error.
So let's see how the compiler uses this information and the function prototype to help us write code.
The function prototype here says that I'll define a function named say hello that expects no parameters
and returns nothing.
Then I use or call the function in main.
The first function call is fine since it matches the prototype.
The second function call will cause a compiler error.
We told the compiler that the function expects no parameters but we're passing in an integer to the
function call.
The compiler won't allow this.
The third function call is within an output statement.
Think about this one for a second.
You're telling the compiler to display the value that say hello evaluates to but the function prototype
says that the function say hello doesn't return anything.
So the compiler gives you an error since something's not right.
In this slide I'm providing the same code that you saw in the previous video.
However in this example I'm providing function prototypes for the say hello say world's functions at
the top of the file.
Now the computer knows about these functions and I can call them in any order I wish in my program and
the compiler will make sure that they're called as intended.
Let's head over to the ID and prototype some functions OK I'm in the code like ID and I'm the section
11 workspace in the function prototypes project what I'm going to do here is I'm going to take the sample
that we did in the previous video where we calculate the area of a circle and the volume of a cylinder
and so forth.
And I'm going to rearrange these functions to actually break the program.
Now this worked out because I was very careful about how I define these functions and where I defined
these functions.
So again the compiler is going straight down and reading the source file so it sees calque area defined
here Kuchh area of a circle then it sees it used since it's already seen it defined it's happy about
it.
In this case it's the same thing it sees calque volume of a cylinder.
I use it down here.
It's happy about that.
So everything it's seen before it's being used.
But if I take some of this code let's say that I take all of this code actually right before my main
and I just cut it.
And I want to pace head after the main case and we've got some issues because the compiler is now seeing
only clean up this white space a little bit.
The compiler is now seeing area circle function being called but it hasn't seen the definition yet because
it comes later that's going to cause an issue.
Same thing with volume of a cylinder.
So you're going to get issues here.
So let me run this or compile it actually won't run.
And there you go area the circle was not declared in the scope.
So it has no idea what that functions all about because it hasn't seen it yet.
OK.
You're going to get two errors here.
If we change the order and put this guy down here we're going to get even more errors because now we're
using something before it's being seen.
So now we're going to get probably three errors.
Right.
So that's a problem.
How do we fix this problem well that's where function prototypes come in.
So let's use function prototypes are really really easy to use.
What I want to do is where every function that I'm defining I want to prototype it before I've defined
it.
So obviously at the beginning of the file it will do it right after the namespace statement.
So let's look at this first one here.
I'm just going to copy it and paste it because it basically that's what I want someone to put up right
here and I'll just put a little comment here.
You know what's going on
here my function prototypes.
Remember the function prototype is only the name of the function.
And what it expects and what it returns with a semi-colon at the end right here no function body.
So now the compiler sees that you've prototyped calc volume cylinder to expects to doubles and return
doubles so we can type check that.
OK.
Let's deal with all of these.
So let's do the next one which is my calculate area of the circle.
Copy that up here and paste it.
Put a semi-colon on the end.
Now remember we don't need to have these variable names here and these parameter names.
The compiler could care less.
I'm going to get rid of this one just so you can see the compiler doesn't care all the compiler needs
to know is what is the type of that parameter.
So in this case double is fine.
As I mentioned earlier best practice is to put the names in there for documentation purposes.
But I'll leave it out here just so you can see that it actually does work just fine.
So now we've got those too.
Let's deal with area of the circle and then we'll deal with volume of the cylinder.
So we'll put the circle right here.
The order in which you put the prototypes in doesn't matter because the is going to see them all.
So there's the area of the circle.
Notice this returns nothing and expects nothing.
OK and then we'll do the last one which is the volume of the cylinder so I come back up and I'll put
that last prototype right in here.
That's it.
Now if I compile and run I'll get a clean run.
So we'll put 12 and type in whatever numbers you like.
So that's pretty cool.
Makes it really easy to not have to worry about order.
Oh my goodness you know what did I call this did I define this first.
This was a problem in early languages.
I remember using Pascal and there was just no way to get around this.
Eventually they added something like forward declarations which really makes things handy.
So this is just standard practice that C and C++ programmers use to create those function prototypes.
Now what really is nice about this suppose it I mess up my function prototype and I tell the compiler
that that area circle function that I'm going to define later this is the way you should check to make
sure I use it correctly.
Well I'm not using it correctly right there because I'm not passing an integer into it.
So this won't compile.
This will give me an error right here as is too few arguments to this function right here.
So you've told it again remember it hasn't seen this one down here yet.
Right.
You've told it that that function will be used as in the prototype.
And here you're not using it as in the prototype.
And so I mean get rid of that.
Also if I send in let's say 5 into here before I write again this is not going to match you've just
told it that this function here expects nothing.
But now you passed in an int..
So again it's not going to like that it's going to say too many arguments.
Now to the function call so let's clean that up.
And that's really all there is to prototypes.
Now normally as you programs get larger these prototypes will end up going in a different file in a
h file and we'll get to dot h files or header files our own header files.
When we talk about classes because that's very common to create two pieces of the program.
One is the header information and one is the actual implementation.
Very similar to what's going on here with IO stream.
Those are really considered header files.
So you're going to grab a lot of information from there and that's usually where we put our function
prototypes.
But there you go.
Let me run this again and make sure it's clean got a clean run here so I'll leave this code out there
for you to play with as well get used to these function prototypes.
We do them all the time and it will really make your code better.
Let the compiler help you every chance he gets.